+++
title = "How Dare You"
date = 2021-01-09
taxonomy = [
    "evangelicals",
    "politics",
    "rant",
]
+++

Be aware the following is a rant. It is not carefully researched, nor is it a
methodical analysis or logical argument. It is instead an attempt to capture my
feelings after the events of Jan 07, 2021.

# I'm really angry

I'm angry. Not just a little angry, I'm furious. Angry enough that I want to
punch something. For context, I am a Christian. There are times in my life that
I would have been considered a conservative politically, at least in some
dimensions anyway. But I do not recognize evangelical conservatism today.

The recent events at the capitol are the perfect culmination of 4+ years of
Trump politics. But that isn't really the source of my anger. The source of my
anger is illustrated by the flags with Jesus on them at the assault on the
Capitol. I'm angry with every prominent evangelical who aligned with and
supported Trump. To borrow some phrasing from Christ. "Depart from me I do not
know you." In the name of some policy wins you supported a fool. You made
excuses for him. You encouraged him. You praised him. You told the people that
it was Okay to follow Trump, _and they did_. They followed him as he bullied
others. They followed him as he ridiculed and belittled women. The followed him
as he treated veterans shamefully. They followed him as he called foreigners
names. They followed him as he lied. They followed him as he tried over and
over to do more than the powers of the President allows him to. They followed
him as he demonstrated incompetence over and over and over again. They followed
him as he downplayed the pandemic. They followed him as he falsely claimed
success over it. They followed him as he contributed to the deaths of 300,000+
Americans.

As they followed him they got more and more angry. They believed more and more
lies. They were sucked into conspiracy theories. Families were ripped apart.
Friends, brothers, sisters, wives, and husbands watched in growing horror as
their loved ones were entangled into a web of lies and lost their grip on
reality. And as it continued you kept giving his followers permission to align
with Trump. You dragged God's name through the mud for Israel and some court
seats.

I don't want to be you when God asks you to justify yourselves. You are
responsible as shepherds for your flock. And you are a part of the reason
there were flags with Jesus name being waved on national television as those
people you led stormed the Capitol building.

**Shame** on you! And may God have mercy on you when you face him.